AKI Capture Deep Explanation
Atomic Kernel Inference Capture (AKI Capture) is the core innovation of AgDR v0.2.
It is the mechanism that makes every autonomous agent decision mathematically indivisible and contemporaneous with its evidentiary record.
It is not a log, not a callback, and not post-hoc auditing.
It is a kernel-level atomic transaction that forces the decision, its reasoning, the PPP triplet, and the cryptographic signature to be created as a single, uninterruptible operation inside the CPU kernel itself.
Formal Definition
AtomicInferenceCapture(ctx, reasoning_trace, output, ppp_triplet, human_delta_chain) ≡
{
sign(BLAKE3(ctx ∥ reasoning_trace ∥ ppp_triplet ∥ human_delta_chain)),
persist(Merkle-append to forward-secret chain),
return committed
}
This entire block executes as one indivisible kernel transaction. There is no partial state visible to the system at any point.
Execution Flow (Step by Step)

Inference Entry
The model begins inference. The universal wrapper immediately triggers AKI.
Kernel Atomic Section Begins
local_irq_save(flags) disables all interrupts.
preempt_disable() disables kernel preemption.
The CPU now runs in a protected, non-interruptible bubble.
Payload Assembly
The full payload is assembled in kernel memory:
ctx (system context)
reasoning_trace (structured JSON of every step)
output (final decision)
ppp_triplet (Provenance · Place · Purpose)
human_delta_chain (binary deltas + FOI escalation)

Cryptographic Operations
BLAKE3 hash of the entire payload
Ed25519 signature using kernel-held key
Merkle tree append to the forward-secret chain
Commit or Rollback
If successful, the record is committed.
If anything fails, the entire transaction rolls back — the record never exists.
Kernel Atomic Section Ends
Interrupts and preemption are restored.

Why This Is Mathematically Indivisible

No other process, interrupt, or core can observe or modify the payload mid-operation.
The CPU primitives create a true critical section at hardware level.
Zero clocks or timers are used — atomicity is enforced by CPU instruction ordering.

Integration with PPP Triplet
The PPP triplet is not added afterward. It is part of the payload that is hashed and signed inside the atomic block. This guarantees that the meaning of each P is frozen at the exact inference instant and can never be rewritten.
Security & Evidentiary Properties

Tamper-evident: Any post-facto change breaks the Merkle chain.
Non-repudiable: Signed at the exact moment of thought.
Compromise-resistant: Even if user-space is fully owned, the kernel still executes the capture.
Court-ready: Meets and exceeds the Canada Evidence Act reliability test.

This is the mechanism that turns AgDR from “nice-to-have logging” into the first mathematically guaranteed evidentiary infrastructure for autonomous agents.
